(bright music)
Alright, so let's go ahead and implement
a queue and we're going to use an array.
So I've created a project.
I'm putting the code
into package academy.learningprogramming.queues
and I've copied over the usual employee class.
No changes there.
So the first thing I'll do is create
a class for the queue.
So I'll say new java class
and I'm gonna call it Array Queue.
And then we need three fields in this queue.
We need one for the Array.
We need one that's going to track
the front of the queue.
And we need one that's going to track
the back of the queue.
So I'll say private employee
queue,
private int front, and private int back.
Now as usual I'm not using generics.
I could've created a queue and used generics
and then the queue can be used
with any type of object,
but I want us to just focus
on the queue implementation.
So the front and back fields
will initially be zero,
just as top was initially zero
for the top of the stack.
So when we first start out,
front and back will both point to zero
and so we don't need to initialise those
in the constructor.
We just need to create our array.
So I'll say public array queue.
And we'll let the caller tell us
the maximum number of elements
they want in the queue.
And we'll say queue equals new employee
capacity.
Alright, so now let's talk
about adding an element.
We're going to want to add elements
to the back of the queue.
And we'll have to worry about resizing the array
when the queue is full.
So for this implementation,
the front element is always at index front
and the back element is always
at index back minus one.
So if you remember when we implemented stacks
the top field was always pointing
to the next available position in the stack.
Well, it's the same with the back field.
The back field will always be pointing
to the next available position in the queue.
And so, if the back is, let's say,
pointing to position three then that means
that the end of the queue is actually
at position two.
And so the end of the queue
is actually located at position back minus one.
And back is where we would add
the next element that's coming into the queue.
So when there's no elements on the queue
and we add an item,
we're gonna add it at position zero
because when we first create
this instance front and back are both zero
and then we'll increment back to one
because one will be the next available position.
And so after adding the first item
front will be zero and back will be one.
If we add another item, front will still be zero.
We'll add the item into position one
and then we'll increment back to two.
And so, when we add an item
the front field never changes
because we always add items to the back.
Alright, so let's implement the method
for adding an item to the queue.
So we'll say public void add
and we're gonna accept the employee
that we wanna add.
And the first thing we're gonna do
is check whether the queue is full.
Now the queue will be full if back equals
the length of the queue.
Let's say we create a queue of ten.
Well when back equals nine,
the next available position in the queue
is nine and that's fine.
We can put an item in there,
but then we'd increment back to ten
and the next available position would be ten.
That would be an index out of bounds exception.
So once the back equals the length of the queue
we need to resize the array.
So we'll say if back equals
queue.length.
And we're gonna resize the array exactly
the same way we did it for stacks.
So we'll say employee
new array
equals new employee.
And we're gonna double the current size,
so two times
queue.length.
And then we need to copy the existing items
on the queue over to the new array.
So we'll say system.arraycopy.
We're gonna copy from the queue.
We're gonna start from the beginning.
We're gonna copy into the new array,
starting at the beginning.
And we want to copy queue.length elements.
Then finally, we're going
to say queue equals new array.
And so, so far this is looking exactly
like the push method.
And then once we're sure that the back field
isn't gonna point to an invalid index,
we just go ahead
and assign the new employee to back.
So queue back
equals employee.
And then finally, we want to increment back.
And that's it.
That's our add method.
We check whether the queue is full.
If it is, we resize the array.
We assign the employee into what back
is pointing to because back always points
to the next available position
in the queue, and then we increment back.
Okay, so now let's remove
an element from the queue.
So we'll say public employee
remove.
We always remove the first item on the queue
so we don't need to pass anything.
Now, the first thing we need to check is whether
the queue is empty.
And how will we do that?
How will we check whether the queue is empty?
Because as we add and remove employees
the front and back positions will be changing.
Well, we should be able
to subtract front from back
and that will give us the number
of items in the queue.
Remember that back is always one position greater
than the end of the queue.
So let's say, when we first create the queue
we come in and we add our first item.
So, we just saw that when we add our first item
at the end we'll increment back to one
and front is zero.
So, we have one item on the queue.
Back is one, front is zero.
Back minus front would be one minus zero,
which is one.
So we have one item on the queue.
If we came in and added another item,
back would be incremented to two.
We don't touch the front pointer
when we add an employee
because we're always working
at the back of the queue.
So if we came in and added a second employee,
back would be incremented to two,
front would still be zero.
Two minus zero is two.
We have two items on the queue.
If we then removed an item from the queue,
we're not gonna touch the back pointer
because we always take items off
the front of the queue.
So what we'll do is increment,
as you'll see in a minute,
we'll increment the front of the queue.
So we'll increment front to one.
And so at that point
we'd have two minus one is one.
And so we started out
with two employees on the queue,
we pulled one off and we have one left.
So basically, we can get the size
by subtracting front from back.
So I'm gonna put that into it's own method.
So I'm gonna say public
int size
and we're gonna return back minus front.
Now if your really astute,
you may have noticed something
a little bit weird about the add method.
Don't worry, we're gonna come back to that.
So, in the remove method
we're gonna say if the size is zero,
meaning there's nothing on the queue,
then we're going to throw a new
no such element exception,
and that's in the java.util package.
So if you try to remove something
from the empty queue
we're gonna throw an exception.
If that's not the case
and there is something on the queue,
well we always take elements
from the front of the queue,
so we're gonna say employee, employee
equals queue front
because that's the employee we're going to remove.
Then we're gonna null out queue front.
This is just doing a bit of clean up.
We're then going to increment front
because if we started out,
let's say, front is one,
we want to remove the employee at position one.
Well after we've done that the new front of the queue will
be two because the new front will be
the next employee in the queue.
Now there's a bit of an optimization
we can do here at this point.
At this point we can check whether
the size is zero.
If we've removed the only item on the queue,
so if
size
equals zero,
then we can reset the front
and back positions back
to the beginning of the array.
So we can say front equals zero
and back equals zero.
So, if after pulling off the employee
there's nothing left on the queue,
we'll just reset the front and back.
So it's like resetting the queue
to an empty queue.
And then finally, of course,
we wanna return the employee
that we pulled off the queue.
And so, to remove something from the queue
we first check to see if the queue is empty,
and if it is we throw an exception
and we're done.
Otherwise, we save the employee at the front
of the queue into employee.
We null out that position in the queue.
Just a little bit of clean up.
And then we increment the front field
because the new front of the queue is going
to be at the front plus plus.
And then we check the size
and if there's nothing left on the queue,
so basically we remove the only employee,
then we set the front and back to zero.
So we're basically resetting the queue.
And finally, of course, we return the employee.
And so we still have our peek method.
So I'm going to say public employee
peek.
And just like with
the remove,
we're gonna check if the queue is empty
and if it is we're gonna throw an exception
so I just copy the code from there.
Now if the queue isn't empty
we just wanna return the employee
at the front of the queue,
but we do not want to remove
the employee from the queue.
Remember, when we peek at a stack
we return the top of the stack,
but we don't change the stack in any way.
It's the same thing with the queue.
We return the employee at the front of the queue,
but we don't change the queue in any way.
So all we have to do is say return queue front
and we're done.
We don't wanna change the front field.
I'll just delete that blank line there.
And that's it.
That's our queue implementation.
Now one final method I'll add
is a method to print the queue.
So that when we start playing around
with our implementation,
we can print out what's on the queue.
So I'll say public void print queue.
And their queue is in array
so this should be fairly simple.
We just have to keep in mind that
if we're gonna print the queue
from front to back, front might not be zero.
So, we'll say
for int i equals front,
i less than back,
i plus plus.
And I'll just say system dot out dot print line
queue i.
Now remember that the back points
to the next available position
so the end of the queue is actually
a back minus one,
so we only want to increment i until i
is less than back.
When i equals back,
we're actually one beyond the back of the queue.
Okay, so now that we finished
our implementation let's go to the main method.
I've already added the code to create
our usual five employees.
So let's create our queue.
I'll say array queue.
Queue equals new array queue.
And I'll make it ten just like I did
with the stack.
And let's add employees to the queue.
So I'll say queue.add Jane Jones.
Queue dot add John Doe.
Queue.add Mary Smith.
Queue.add Mike Wilson.
And finally, queue.add Bill End.
And let's print our queue.
Queue.print queue.
So let's go ahead and run.
And we'll see our five employees.
Now this time they're printed out in the order
that we added them because this isn't a stack
so we don't see the items in reverse order.
We added Jane to the queue first
so she is at the front of the queue
and then we added John
so he's second in the queue,
then Mary, then Mike, then Bill.
So let's remove two employees.
And we expect to remove Jane and John
because Jane is first in the queue
and John is second.
So we'll say queue.remove
and we'll do it again.
And then let's print our queue.
I'm going to comment out that print queue.
So let's run.
And we'll see that we only
have three employees left on the queue.
Mary, Mike and Bill.
So Jane and John have been removed
because it's first in first out.
So Jane was first in so she's first out.
And then John was second in so he's the next one
to be taken off the queue.
Okay, so lets peek at our queue
and we should see Mary.
So I'll say system.out.print line
queue.peek.
And lets print our queue after that
to show that the queue wasn't changed.
So I'm going to comment out that print queue.
So we're gonna peek at Mary
and then we should see the exact same print out
for the queue because when you peek
you don't change the queue.
So let's run.
And we'll see Mary printed twice.
This is from the peek
and then this part is the print queue.
So we peeked at Mary.
We were able to see what the first employee
on the queue is,
but we did not change the queue.
Alright, so just for fun lets remove
the remaining three employees
and then print our queue.
So I'll comment out that there
and I'm gonna add three more queue.removes.
So let me copy this here,
paste this here,
and I'll add one more.
And we should see nothing printed
because our queue should be empty.
We're just testing
to make sure nothing bad happens
when we pull the last employee off.
And indeed we don't.
Now, if we were to do a sixth remove,
at this point the queue is empty.
So this sixth remove should result
in a no such element exception.
Let's try it out.
And indeed that's what we get.
On line twenty-nine,
right here, we get the no such element exception.
I'm gonna comment out that last queue.remove
And let's trying adding an employee now
just to make sure that,
when we removed the last employee,
we properly reset the front and back
so there's still room in the queue.
Let's add Mike Wilson.
And here's a print queue here.
So let's run.
And only Mike is on the queue.
So that's it for implementation.
Now, if we go back to array queue
and let me just close this down.
I said there's something weird about this add
and it's actually here when we're checking
whether the back equals the queue dot length.
That's the check we're using to see whether
the queue is full.
Now, I want you to think about
what would happen in this situation.
Let's suppose we add two employees
and then we remove an employee
and we add another employee
and we remove another employee
and we keep doing that.
So we never have more than two employees
on the queue at a time.
Do you think that the array should be resized?
The answer should be no, right?
I mean, if we have a queue of size ten
and we only ever have two employees on the queue,
the array should never have to be resized.
But with our implementation
will that be the case?
Give this some thought
and in the next video we'll take a look
at how we can improve this implementation.
I'll see you there.